---
title: 'Sovereign Cloud Stack R9 released'
authors:
    - name: 'Sovereign Cloud Stack'
postType: announcements
language: en
date: '2025-09-26'
slug: release9
template: 'post'
---

## Sovereign Cloud Stack R9: Broadening applicability

**Europe, 2025-09-26: Sovereign Cloud Stack Release 9 completed**

The inspiring and sold-out SCS Summit 2025 in Berlin clearly displayed
continued interest from both the public sector and the industry to leverage the
SCS standards and software to reduce dependencies and risks when adopting and
implementing digital solutions. For many participants, there was no question
that building open standards and open source software together is what we need
to do now in order to make progress with digitization and ensure that we
have control, innovation and value creation capabilities.

The SCS community does also produce a complete modular open source software
stack that implements the SCS standards and that is used in pieces or as a
whole by more than half a dozen providers to offer public or private cloud
services. The technology can certainly be considered tried and proven powering
public clouds for years without any unplanned outages and for example providing
the cloud platform for the "Bayern Cloud Schule" which is used by many hundreds
of thousands of students and parents and teachers in Bavaria every day.

The SCS software receives continuous updates by the community. Twice a year,
it goes the extra mile to craft a release and take extra time to communicate
the progress and plan the next half year. In the summit week, the release 9
of the software was completed.

### Improved hardware management

While users have the power of standardized APIs to manage their virtual
machine and container environments, the cloud operators have to deal with
their hardware which tends to grow more diverse over time. With the work
on netbox-manager, the capabilities to generate configuration for the
hardware have been extended especially for networking gear. A web-interface
has been added to make it easier to keep an overview over events and status.

### Current software

On the virtualization side, OSISM-10.x now provides the current OpenStack
2025.1 (Epoxy) release. As SCS operators have come to expect, the upgrade
from the previous version has been validated extensively. For the first
time, skipping over one release is supported, so a one-step upgrade from
OSISM-8.x (with OpenStack 2024.1 Caracal) is also possible, not just from
OSISM-9.x (with OpenStack 2024.2 Dalmatian).

The newer OpenStack releases come with the upstreamed domain manager role
that the SCS community has worked on and contributed, providing a well-defined
role for enabling self-service user and project management.
The handling of pass-through PCI devices has been improved, supporting
live-migrations in a broader range of scenarios despite the pass-through.
This can help specifically with GPU accelerated AI workloads.

The mature ceph storage technology has been upgrade to the Reef release.
Ubuntu 24.04 LTS is now used as the default operating system on the hosts,
bringing support for the latest server hardware and improved performance.

The provided container node images also used Ubuntu 24.04 LTS now. Having
the latest kernel optimizations is also relevant for the guest images; and
with the more and more relevant GPU pass-through for AI acceleration,
sometimes even hardware support. With current kernels, it is also ensured
that latest innovation e.g. with eBPF being used for container networking
with cilium can be leveraged.

The latest version for kubernetes cluster-API and the cluster-API provider
are used, staying in sync with the upstream progress. SCS R9 comes with
support for Kubernetes-1.33.x, bringing enhancements with scalability,
token handling and pod management.

### Simplifying maintenance with new cluster stack series

SCS Kubernetes clusters need the ability to talk to the underlying OpenStack
platform to create resources such as persistent volumes or load balancers and
thus need a secret to authenticate their requests. The duality of two different
secret formats has been cleaned up, also making it possible to support
self-signed CAs without hassle. Given this change, the community has taken the
opportunity to rationalize the ClusterClass variables that users use to
customize their clusters. The helm charts for the add-ons (such as CNI, CSI,
CCM, metrics) no longer need to be bundled in the releases but are pulled
alongside the images now. This simplifies maintenance going forward. It does
however introduce a breaking change, so the "scs2" cluster stack series was
started, succeeding the old "scs" series. Documentation and tooling to automate
the conversion will be provided soon. The community has committed to maintain
the new cluster stack series and to continuously provide the artifacts to ensure
that users can easily deploy the kubernetes patch levels short-term order to
stay secure.

### Future

Beyond following the upstream technology evolution and continuing to adapting
to it, the SCS community will work on improving the technology e.g. with
respect to performance and federation capabilities. Many of the contributing
companies are inspired and driven by the requests of their customers. The SCS
community continues to provide the well-established mechanisms to encourage for
communication and collaboration on those, also bringing features (and of course
bug-fixes) to ensure that the work benefits the larger SCS community and the
upstream communities. This extends beyond the current scope of the software
releases. Additional software that implements the SCS standards is encouraged
to leverage those same mechanisms. While the community has somewhat
deemphasized the role of the half-yearly releases -- reflecting that more
partners are indeed managing to benefit from the more continuous development
reality -- there will continue to be regular releases. Beyond including more
alternatives for the existing software platform, the focus is mainly on
enabling the workloads on top of SCS-standardized containers by providing
suitable standards and software that supports it.

